Oh, gee.
Oh.
Good afternoon. Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
We've set aside 10 minutes for your submission.
The time is yours. Away you go.
Good afternoon, all, and on behalf of Organics Aotearoa New Zealand, thank
you for the opportunity to submit today.
I'd give a little bit of background on OANZ.
I'd like to introduce Marie Doole as our policy advisor, and
Brendan Huari as our strategic advisor as well, too.
So,
Organics Aotearoa New Zealand has been formed since 1998,
and we are an umbrella industry group, supporting,
representing our organic sector of over
$1.18 billion of
turnover in our sector, and that includes about $600 million
worth of exports.
So, we thank you for the opportunity to present today.
Appreciate the time is short. We would just like to
state that we oppose this bill in the current form.
And if the bill is not abandoned, we'd like to see the consultation process
extended by at least six months.
We see some major fish hooks in there that this current
amendment bill has the potential to undermine Aotearoa New Zealand's
GE-free
current position.
And
we would like to see some greater dialogue
to engage
with our wider community in New Zealand
to gain,
looking at the economic impact and the social impact and the trade
impact of these implications. We feel as though we
haven't been consulted effectively, and we wish to request more
time in that consultation. So,
I'd like to hand over now to Marie
to take on our key points
or to tease out the key points, I guess, is what I'm saying, is we are definitely
concerned. There's some key points in there.
I'll pass it over to Marie. Thank you, Marie.
Thank you, Scott, and thanks again for providing us time to
present on OANZ's submission. I'm just going to pull the Rs out of the
submission. I know that convention is that we assume that the
committee have read them.
That's right.
And so these are just the key points.
So, from OANZ's perspective, there appears to be
a great deal of risk here, and the level of impact
analysis and consultation appears out of proportion
with the potential risk to be encountered.
And that's the kind of primary overarching concern, and that extends to
the HASNO changes, but also beyond into their interaction with the
ACVM and, of course, the Gene Technology Bill.
There's quite a complex regulatory interplay there that hasn't been
articulated in a way that submitters can sort of get their heads around it.
And I think that is important to keep in mind, that contextual
challenge.
We do have some very specific concerns that OANZ have articulated.
In particular,
preemptive changes to HASNO in respect of the Gene
Technology Bill. OANZ's view is that is inappropriate.
It is foreshadowing a bill that has not yet come into law, and there
is considerable risk with that, given, of course, how controversial that
bill was and how much work there is needed to achieve acceptability.
The second is the addition of the new Part 5A process.
OANZ's view is that that is Gene
Tech Bill by stealth. It is actually enabling some of the
legislative outcomes of that bill before it is passed.
The third is new terms and relatively unclear
terms, terms that have not been in common usage to date and
are not common around the world. This is going to confound
implementation and potentially result
in delays and further uncertainty.
And so those terms really need to be thought about more carefully.
Clear example is denuing.
There is considerable discretion being brought about for the Environmental
Protection Authority in particular, particularly around notifications
and approvals, and there are some quite considerable concerns around the process
that occurs in that space already, and providing additional
discretion, particularly out of view, not properly countered with
transparency appears very risky.
And that is particularly true of the current context where we've got
quite significant organizational change going on with the system steward,
Manatū Mātetai, which is now part of MIRT as of
yesterday. These things are creating considerable
churn. Also in an election year, there's a lot going on, and there's
little to satisfy OANZ that the necessary operational improvements
to give confidence to those accepting that discretion is present will
actually occur.
And so finally, I think the key points we would make is that
we do urge the committee to tread very carefully.
Many of the elements of this bill appear to be bells that can't be
unrung. And there is a point at which
risks are brought about
in ways that are irreversible, such that they become ungovernable in the
future. So we urge the committee to think carefully on this matter
and recognize the broad risks and the lack of consultation.
And note that OANZ is absolutely open to the conversations
that this bill would entail. It's just that they haven't occurred.
So, that's all from me on the summary, and I will go back
to Scott and Brendan.
Thank you, Marie. Brendan, do you have anything you wish to add to that?
We'd like to leave some question time, obviously.
No, I think it's best that we move straight to questions and utilize this time
appropriately. Thank you.
Steve.
Cool.
We've been assured by officials that this doesn't weaken
the regulatory regime around the release of GMOs, but you're not
convinced of that. Your interpretation is that, as you've said,
has some of the effect of the Gene Tech bill by stealth.
How can you be so sure of that?
Marie? I'll say we have
done in-depth analysis of this. We've watched the Gene Tech
bill for quite some time. We were heavily involved in
conferring with that.
And now we see that these
two bills of the HASNO amendment and the ACVM, Steve,
are working in cohorts. The three are together intrinsically linked.
And I'll pass back to Marie to answer further.
I think our submission unpacks our perspective on Part 5A
and what it enables and why it appears as though it is trying to
enable those outcomes.
So I won't go into great detail, but I think you could look at this two
ways. One is that we're sure it won't, and the other is we're not sure it will
protect from the outcomes of the Gene Technology Bill.
So the overarching point here is the lack of certainty and the lack of
effective consultation and communication of the changes.
And so those two things, on neither of those can we be satisfied based
on the information available. I understand that the officials may
have provided that reassurance, but
at this point, it's difficult to reach that view as a submitter.
Follow-up question,
Sab.
Yeah. Thank you.
There's an intersection that's been communicated to us through these two submission
processes between the ACVM and HASNO.
And the Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act does deal with hazardous
substances, of which there are thousands.
We've heard there's benefits to having easier pathways for
less impactful chemicals, things like biologicals.
Can you tell us where the fish hooks are in
biologicals from your point of view?
Well, I'll have a go at answering that.
And as a farmer and a grower buying products, the
biologicals is the way forward for us,
whether you're a conventional farmer or an organic farmer as myself.
And the danger with biological products is there
is a huge amount of
DNA involved in there effectively, Steve, and you don't know what you
don't know until it's disclosed, tested, verified, checked, et cetera.
And we're seeing that there's a lot of potential for harm,
unintended consequences here, and we need to be really, really careful on that.
And particularly,
Marie just mentioned it before about the clause, the denuded.
We don't know what that means, and that's a new term that's
just popped up here in these amendments.
So,
we are really, really concerned about the lack of transparency,
the lack of labeling. We saw that in the Gene Tech Bill,
and we don't see any clarification on that point here in
this HASNO amendment.
And perhaps just to support Scott,
unless the committee is aware, we found it difficult to find a
definition of biologicals.
So,
I mean, that's part of the problem in the lack of definitions that's been
provided in the short timeframe and the overlap
between the HASNO, the ACVM, and the
Gene Tech, which hasn't even passed its second reading yet, and there's this
implication that everything's okay when it's clearly not.
Supplementary, Suz.
Do you have any evidence of this serious harm in other
jurisdictions in terms of the biologicals?
And did you say at the start, Scott, that you actually supported the use of
biologicals?
Yes, we do.
Yeah.
We are a biological economy, biological farmers.
We totally-
Yeah
... support biologicals.
But the impact of that was-
We have to be careful in the biologicals that in the haste of
adopting new technologies and new biological products, that we don't
have unintended organisms trapped inside those biologicals as well
too, and therefore affecting our trade,
and our ecology,
and our social license to operate as farmers.
And so is there evidence of that having happened in other jurisdictions?
I can't think of something off the top of my head at the moment, but there's
definitely a worldwide shift towards biologicals and there's a
worldwide shift towards more gene tech and biologicals for
sure.
Yeah. And specifically, Scott's talking about these are
certified organic acknowledged biologicals.
And there is an example, for example,
years, quite a long time ago, rotenone was a certified organic product as an
input into organic farming. It was withdrawn because it was seen to have a link
to Parkinson's. It was immediately withdrawn from the organic repertoire
of biologicals that could be used.
So,
the point that we're making here is that there is no definition, and
clearly language is being used to adopt what
has been a place from nature. And this is part of
this debate that we have to have, not assume.
And there is no analysis done on this.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for your time. We've come to time,
and we appreciate you taking the time today to submit to the committee.
Thank you.
We're going to move on now to BiotechNZ, and
they're via
Zoom as well.
Hmm.
Good afternoon, Zara.
Kia ora. Kia ora,
Welcome to-
mana
... Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
We've set aside
10 minutes for your hearing, so fire away.
Kia ora. As I said, Zara Chamion. I'm Executive Director of Biotech New
Zealand. I'm joined today by Matthew Cozzey, the CEO of
CropLife Australia, as we work incredibly closely with
CropLife Australia. I just want to highlight my members are
diverse, so they sit across the human, animal health, industrial, and
environment, and of course, ag. They're all at different stages, very much
at that early stage research and development, right through to some of those
larger companies. Biotech, we are continually
raising the awareness around the opportunities and the use of
biotech. That's why we work very closely with MBIE
around certainly the primary legislation with the Technology
Bill and supporting them around what would the secondary leg
look like. I do want to say that we do understand that this
HASNO amendment is intended to sit alongside the Gene
Tech Bill, and you guys have made it really clear that these amendments really
are not to change the gene technology or the GMO
regulatory setting, and we do welcome the efforts that you
guys have put forward in terms of modernizing.
In terms of our submission, we pretty much have the similar concerns that
other oral submitters have
highlighted, so around those timelines, fees, levies, and of course,
the definition of new organisms.
Before we go onto a bit more detail around these areas, I do want to
highlight that we do actually have GM in our food system already, whether
it's feeds in animals, whether it's GM ingredients in our
supermarkets. New Zealand has a very active
participation in international clinical trials, certainly around CRISPR
technologies and, of course, our own CAR T-cell
therapy. We keep talking about the risks of
technology, and I feel that we never think about the benefits.
Yeah.
And I just wanted to remind you of Jay Clark's
perspective, which he spoke last week.
Mm-hmm.
He was a grower from New Zealand Vegetable Growers Association, and he
highlighted the real environmental and
cost burden that they are faced due to today's
inability to use those new gene technologies.
I was shocked that they grow twice as many broccoli because
they got a 50% loss to disease, which means twice
as much fertilizer, twice as much chemicals onto his
land. He was saying if he had the opportunity to access some of
these varieties or these new breeds that are disease or pest
resistant, he could use a reduction in some of these chemicals
on farm. And I just thought, is this not a good thing?
I also just want to highlight, and Matthew will go in a bit more detail, but
just be very careful about those unintended consequences,
certainly for the human health when we're looking at this definition.
Human health sector, a lot of the gene technologies is really low
risk. Very low risk to the environment, but they will be caught up in this
definition, and we would recommend you to work with the likes of
Medicines New Zealand around those definitions and
certainly those exclusions. Again, just avoiding that
unnecessary regulatory burden for companies, but
also for yourself as well. I'd like to hand over to Matthew.
He's got a bit more in-depth thoughts around
certainly the amendment around the bill.
And the reason I really rely on Australia is they have 20 years'
experience in this space, whereas we have
none. Matthew.
Thanks, Zara. Chair and members of the committee, thanks for your time.
More broadly, firstly, on the principles of the
HASNO
Bill. It is an extraordinarily conservative bill by any
comparison in other international jurisdictions.
In terms of its interaction with the Gene Tech Bill, it's an appropriate
support, preempting any policy
change that the Parliament might initiate through that.
So it certainly, in and of itself, is a restrictive measure,
not an enabling one.
I think it's important from the plant science industry's perspective, as
Zara's pointed out,
this is no longer an academic debate.
The rest of the world and New Zealand's leading
international agricultural competitors are 30 years into this.
But aside from the benefits to agriculture,
and obviously as the plant science industry, we serve
all forms of farming. Our customer base is conventional, modern, and
organics, who are a huge customer for us.
But aside from the direct benefits to
agriculture,
we see over the next 10, 20, 30 years, the pressures that
will be on both agriculture and protecting our own
respective natural environments will increase
significantly as a result of climate change and the disease,
weed, and pest pressures that will bring And every bit of
safe innovation and scientific breakthrough will be needed to support
in doing that. Specifically to this bill, there are just three
components that I think at a technical level, the definition of new
organism
has some uncertainty around it,
and it relies heavily on the regulatory discretion and secondary legislation
that might be appropriate going forward once the Gene Tech bill is in place.
But to start with, it being addressed with more certainty in the
primary bill is probably a good idea.
The risk of duplicative regulation on low-risk gene
edited organisms is significant in this, and I think better
clarity around that. We've seen this around the rest of the world, and Australia
over the last few years has recognized that and
excluding issues such as SDN1. Any
plant science breeding innovation that is
indistinguishable from what would be called traditional breeding, mutagenesis at
scientific level, really shouldn't be captured by the
HASNO Act, mainly to ensure the integrity of the proposed bill
remains intact. And I think the lack of clarity around the proposed levy framework
is one that does need addressing
so that you don't see unintended expansion, and you have
a framework that is proportionate and supports
an effective regulator. Happy to take questions.
Right. We'll go to Steve.
Yeah. It's useful that you want greater definition of new organism.
I think that's a message that we've heard from both sides of the argument.
Do you have any steer on what denuded means
in your experience in other jurisdictions or Australia?
Do you have this term existing anywhere, and is there any clarity on what it means?
Not specifically, Senator, because I don't believe it's a scientific term that
regulators are using.
But
the structures around the
new regulations in Australia, although our own system
is now about 20 years behind where they recognize it should be, and
it's under the process of being modernized under the national framework.
But the OGTR, our Office of Gene Technology Regulator,
has provisions to address all those measures.
And I think that's the important thing with any
legislation and associated regulation, is that it
enables regulators to respond to any new
issues, and also preempt any changes in
innovation. As you and the committee would recognize,
regulation and legislation being able to keep up with scientific
innovation is a challenging thing.
And that is why empowering regulators without restricting them,
but setting those parameters as the foundations is very important.
That's kind of the question.
Yeah.
You spoke about the unintended consequences for medicines.
Are you concerned that parameters that are designed to protect
us from environmental consequences might be also applied
to medicines that are after all not an environmental risk per se?
Yes.
Right. Okay.
I've understood correctly then. Thank you.
Any further questions?
No.
Well, thank you very much for your submission today.
We appreciate you taking the time,
and the committee will consider your submission when we
deliberate on the bill. So thank you very much.
Thanks, Chair.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Right. Moving on. We have the Sustainability Council
of New Zealand
via Zoom.
There's lots of other stuff, isn't
there? Hmm. They sure do.
Mm.
Oh, is he?
He's online.
Oh, okay. I can't see.
Good afternoon. Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
We've set aside 10 minutes for you to
do your submission. If you could
leave some time at the end for questions, that'd be appreciated.
So fire away.
Can you hear me now?
Yes, we can.
Sorry, I'm just trying to get my slides up on the screen, and there seems to be
something unusual from what would normally be the case for
sharing. Ah, actually now. Here we go.
Wait for it.
And, um.
It's an addition to the, what he's provided.
Yeah, must be. Yes.
Right. Thank you for the time.
The Sustainability Council has been monitoring the HASNO Act for
24 years. We monitor both the hazardous substances and the new organism
side. Today, I'm focusing on the new organism side for
brevity.
The key message to our submission is
that this is a new bill,
but it's very much the same outcomes as the Maori Gene Technology Bill.
That bill would've swept away HASNO to largely deregulate GMO
use in practice.
This bill would surgically strip the HASNO
protections that would then allow a very
similar result.
It uses highly strategic amendments to remove tests and
processes that set standards while giving wide discretionary powers to the
EPA
And if you go back to the purpose of HAZNO, to protect the environment and
the health and safety of communities, it would undermine the ability to
reliably deliver on that. That's the net effect of this bill.
How does it do that? I want to give you four samples from a
range of things where this surgical amendment
takes place.
An obvious one is where minimum standards are
removed for all outdoor activities except uncontrolled
releases.
Now, staggeringly, an activity would then be
okay under a conditional release,
even if it's likely to cause significant adverse effects on human health
and safety. In other words, a probability of greater
than 50% that it would cause significant adverse effects.
Clause 53A2 says that if the EPA does
not notify the application
and there are still significant effects, the EPA would only consult
people likely to be directly affected.
It can be significant cultural, economic, environmental, other health effects
have been already determined to be present, but national and regional
organizations that speak to these are simply shut out.
And that's when these sort of organizations are
often the ones that monitor these sort of long-term risks
that are more diffuse, and the reason that the HAZNO Act was broken out
from the RMA to provide for that particular type of
thing.
Clause 12 says the EPA chief executive, or even an appointee,
can hear and determine a whole lot of applications on his own.
Instead of a committee of people, as is currently the case, with relevant skills
making a determination, we get an individual who's not even the CEO
that could affect an entire agricultural sector with its decision.
And Clause 42 says the EPA could
take a conditional release and make it unconditional
simply with a set of criteria that are not prescribed
by anybody except an EPA.
There is another layer of things which I'm calling
loopholes, which are more subtle but even more
dramatic in their effect. They effectively bypass the protections altogether.
If you take Clause 27,
the EPA can determine
that an experimental organism is not a GMO and
there is nothing in statute to say whatsoever what test or
definitions or standards or anything it must
abide by. No
process requirements, no requirements to involve interested parties, and no
accountability.
So this is in effect an explicit
acknowledgement of
the wide
delegation of authority that's given to the EPA
when something would otherwise be completely covered by HAZNO.
A developer can bypass the entire regulatory structure in this way.
A new thing to HAZNO is notices, and this mechanism can
actually allow the EPA to regulate significant impacts.
Again, no standards, no procedure, no accountability.
The bill effectively allows the
EPA to make law simply by writing a notice.
I want to stress that the ability to protect is
not a requirement to protect. You really want to
know when any statutory regulator
is up, what can you rely on them to do?
Yes, the bill would leave the EPA still able to implement high
standards. But the EPA's track record demonstrates the risk that it
could simply hug legal minimum standards.
It has gone below statutory constraints in the past, and we've taken them to the
High Court to, for example, in 2014,
have the High Court find that the EPA wrongly removed from regulatory
coverage two completely new techniques for
genetic modification,
such that everything that would've been made for them would've been exempt simply
because they chose to put it outside regulatory
coverage. That's the EPA trying to make law, not
simply apply or administer the law. Very, very different.
In summary, this bill provides a GM
Trojan horse.
It's designed to appear moderate, but inside it are provisions with a
combined effect that has outcomes as radical as that under the
Gene Technology Bill. The power is concentrated, accountability
is seriously eroded, too much discretion,
individuals have the power to write law, stakeholders are often
excluded from key processes, and existing standards are removed or
weakened.
None of this is consistent with the purpose of HAZNO,
which is to protect the health of people
and the environment.
Those clauses should be removed and there's a lot more analysis required of impacts
on this bill, which, as previous submitters suggested, more
consultation is required. Thank you.
Thank you. Look, in your presentation you talk
about GMOs. What
are you classifying as a GMO?
The definitions are international.
They're set by under the Cartagena Protocol and New
Zealand has observed that the HAZNO bill is modeled on the Cartagena Protocol, and
we're very consistent with that.
And that is?
The Cartagena Protocol is the subsidiary document to the
Biodiversity Convention. GMOs are at a significant risk
to biodiversity because they crowd out.
Do you-
GMOs are-
Undermining the biodiversity by
promoting monocultures that tend to displace,
which is why they come under the Biodiversity Convention, and the Cartagena
Protocol is specifically designed to regulate the
transboundary movement, i.e. the export and import, which is actually vital to New
Zealand's ongoing economic welfare, and part of the
reason why HAZNO has been so important to protecting producers who want to
maintain international supply chain
integrity.
Sorry, I just want to clarify something here.
So
stuff that, for example, that has had
genetic material introduced from an outside species, that's GMO,
right?
Yes. But so-
And-
... is anything that modifies the genome by techniques that are
genetic modification.
And gene editing you would classify the same?
The New Zealand legislation does, as does the Cartagena
Protocol. And this is not in
doubt scientifically.
Okay. I'm just- Genetic engineering.
What about mutagenesis and radiation techniques?
Are they-
They are outside Cartagena,
and they're outside the food and agriculture standards because they were
widely developed and widely
put out and grown before this particular
international convention came into place, so-
Okay
... in regulatory terms, it's a safe harbor provision.
Okay. Thank you, Steve.
I forgot my question.
We've got- We've got- No, we've got- We've got one more submitter.
Mm-hmm. She's talking to us.
Yeah. Well, it seems that
we have run out of time.
Huh?
We have run out of time. So- Yeah. It was just because we've got one- Look,
thank you very much for your-
Send it
... submission. Would you be able to send your
slides to the
clerk of the committee, please?
Yes, happy to do that.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for your time.
Right. Moving on. We have finally got
the last submitter of the day, GE Free New Zealand,
and the food environment. And they are here in person, I
believe.
We have Claire Blakely and Cara Vandeleur, is that
right?
Kia ora.
Welcome.
Kia ora. I also want to start by saying-
Yes. So
you have 10 minutes. Fire away.
Tena koutou katoa. Thank you, Chair and Committee, for the opportunity for Claire
Blakely and myself to present to you today.
We would like to first support the Sustainability Council and ONS
just recently with their oral submissions, as also recently the
PSGR NZ and Te Waka Kaiora's submissions as well.
Probably a few more amongst them as well.
We do, however, support the precautionary principle and the provisions that
recognize and integrate Te Tiriti o Waitangi into the act as
per clauses four to eight. These are the essential safeguards that protect
our communities, our environment, and our current premium value produce.
However, we do not support the provisions that would permit hazardous substances
derived from genetic engineered, genetic modified organisms, and
RNA interferencies, pesticides.
International markets show rapid growth continuing for
non-GMO produce, and in many major markets, the demand has
doubled, and it's expected to increase in the next eight years, by
2034, by $2.6 trillion.
New Zealand is well-placed to benefit from this premium market, securing
as opposed to introducing risks to farmers, growers' livelihoods,
and our many businesses. We're also concerned, as other
submitters have mentioned, about the lack of clarity
around the definitions such as vagrants, denude, low risk, levies, and
tiers, amongst a few others, I'm sure.
And we wish that this uncertainty be clarified as to how these different
technologies will be assessed and regulated.
While we acknowledge that these amendments are intended to modernize and streamline
the regulatory framework, we believe that they also introduce significant
risks. The proposed changes would accelerate approvals
of genetic engineered organisms by broadening exemptions,
weakening definitions, and concentrating the decision-making powers within the
authority, potentially in the hands of one single
decision-maker. Any release of genetic engineer
organisms carries long-term risk for our public health, the environment, and
New Zealand's internationally respected reputation for producing
safe, high-quality food.
Since 1988, New Zealand has already been
permitting and supporting genetic engineered research through
the contained field trials and outdoors under strict regulatory
oversight.
For nearly four decades, our public investment has been on the trials, not
with the genetic engineered
animal trials. Not one of these programs has produced any commercial
return. Not one trial came to supporting the
proposed potential of what it was intended to breed,
instead resulting in unintended animal suffering.
The remaining facility was just closed last year, and these
outcomes showed the continued failed trials of
this technology, known as off-target effects.
While we're concerned, we're also concerned that the proposal for New Zealand would
rely on regulatory standards proposed and accepted by other countries such
as Canada, the US, and Australia.
New Zealand's strength lies in maintaining our own independent
science-based regulatory standards, and we must continue to regulate
GE organisms rigorously and uphold our commitment to
preventing any contaminants of all kinds.
Protecting these standards is essential towards protecting everything we value, our
communities, the environment, as well as preserving our reputation and
safeguarding our long-term economic interests.
I'm just going to follow on with more of where
we feel these concerns should be met.
So we believe the HASNO amendment bill is a proxy for the
many new organism sections in the highly contentious gene
technology bill.
The bill does not clearly define in primary legislation
the terms regarding denuded, levy, low risk,
facility or tier system, especially in relation
to sections 2, 25 and
42A.
The approval of new organisms termed as a vagrants has no
legal precedent. The term denuded organism,
section 25C6, relating to
section 141C and part 5A,
is undefined in law.
It appears unsupported by international regulatory, scientific, or
biosafety frameworks.
We specially oppose the removal of the requirement in
section 2 (1) for field tests, which
originally says the organism or any heritable material
arising should be retrieved or destroyed at the end of the
trial.
This allows viable heritable material, seeds, and vegetative
plant parts to remain in the site.
If
this is removed, it could lead to volunteer GM
plants establishing and spreading viable GE material
beyond the trial area. As shown in past field
trials, these adverse effects may persist in the soil
and wider environment after the trial is finished,
potentially forming self-sustaining populations, displacing
valued species, and causing long-term effects.
So we believe a thorough site cleanup is therefore essential to
reduce the chance of ongoing contamination and
prevent lasting harm.
Now, in relation to the assessments, which was mentioned by,
Sustainability Council and the relationship with the Gene
Technology Act, we believe sections 26,
27C, 34 (2) , 34B,
42A are replicas of
162B, 162AB, 163,
and 164A of the Gene Technology Bill.
The HASNO amendment bill refers to classes or
tiers based on risk and complexity.
It does not clearly state which organisms or
techniques belong to each tier.
I note that in the Gene Technology Bill, instead of saying tier, it said
category,
which I believe is similar.
So it doesn't say which tier is exempted or
regulated, and if the tiers are left undefined, there is
a real risk that genetically
modified or gene-edited organisms, which comes under
the in vitro part of Section 2A of the HASNO
Act, the definition of genetically modified organism.
The way the tiers and classes are defined will determine whether GM,
gene edited or other novel organisms stay under
the stricter HASNO approval path or can be
classified in faster, exempt, low-risk tiers
as in the Gene Technology Bill.
We request that you ensure that complete
protections from the effects of GE contamination.
To this end, you add a clause
124G, 3 and 4,
and this would read, "A person is liable to pay damage for
any economic, environmental or livelihood loss or
damage caused by the person from the full release of an
organism
or possessing or dispossessing any new organism released
that has an adverse effect
on surrounding businesses and farms
and environment. A person is liable under some section one,
whether or not the person intended the act,
omission or breach. The person was taking reasonable
care when the act, omission or breach occurred."
So the law must make it clear that a person is liable for damage
caused by release of a new organism from economic,
livelihood, and environmental loss that affects neighboring land
users, organic producers, seed growers, and
GE-free enterprises.
If the bill creates tier pathways or rapid approvals
without matching liability, then the public and affected
industries will carry the risk while the applicants are
insulated from the consequences.
So in summary, we reject the bill as framed.
We ask the committee to amend the bill to specify in HASNO
primary legislation, clear
interpretation of vagrants, denuded organisms, tiers
and rapid assessment.
Clear sections specifying decision-making rules around how
GE tiers and classes, new
biotechnologies and AI are to be structured in
regulations and schedules.
Keep the original HASNO definition of field tests,
material removal obligation
and add a new section 124G (3) to cover
full
civil and legislative liability for harm caused
by civil full release. We ask that the bill is
paused, the amendment bill is paused,
until the regulations have been written
and the public has been re-called for
submissions on a wider scale than what the
original omnibus
regulation said. And may I also say the rest is in our
rather more detailed
submission. Thank you.
Thank you. We've come to time, unfortunately.
Very much.
So,
we appreciate you taking the time today to come in and
present to us.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
That's great.
Yeah.
All right then,
we can whip through a couple of bits of this business